**Living in a World of Big Data and Smart Things**
==================================================

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*WxGXyfu4qxT6wFWZiq1Btw.jpeg)
**Technology is rapidly changing the reality around us**
**Technology is rapidly changing the reality around us**. The world of
things is becoming much smarter, and with each passing year this trend
will only gather momentum. Forget about ready-made solutions; forget
about multi-year strategies. The word “traditional” is no longer on
trend. Everything familiar that we have known for years will very soon
cease to exist and objective reality will become distorted beyond
recognition. The winners in this race will be the first to recognize and
accept the new and rapidly changing state of affairs — a new reality
driven no longer by production, but by intellect, not by the end
product, but by an innovative idea for a product. And this is why the
Internet of Things is now a trend that no technology company can afford
to ignore.

**Let’s take the fashion industry as an example**. Imagine that you no
longer need to buy a new dress. Instead, you now buy the design idea and
print the dress yourself on a 3D printer. American Joshua Harris has
already introduced the market to the innovative idea of a printer that
not only substitutes for our home wardrobe, but also for our familiar
clothes shops. Instead of tee-shirts and trousers, brands will produce
semi-fabricated cartridges with accessories and fabric. And all you will
have to do is go to the manufacturer’s website, select the item of
clothing you want and print it on your home printer. When you get tired
of the thing, you just “undo” it and create a new one for yourself.

**From the huge workshops of textile factories** and cumbersome
warehouses full of finished clothing, the cycle will be reduced to just
three elements: “person — software — machine”. Against this backdrop,
the complete transition of many branches of the economy from offline to
online is becoming inevitable. Ukrainian 3D designers are already using
a service called Kwambio that enables any user to acquire and replicate
their creations on a 3D printer. This designer uploads his work to the
open platform, while the user buys the design he likes for subsequent 3D
printing.

**In 1998, the market monopolist Kodak** had 170,000 employees and sold
85% of all photographic paper in the world. Could the bosses of Kodak
have imagined then that just three years later people would abandon
paper in favour of “digital”, that Kodak’s business model would
disappear and the company itself would go bust? Hardly…

**Analysts predict that by 2020, 30 billion home appliances** will be
connected to the Internet, rising to 50 billion 5 years later. We are on
the brink of Industry 4.0, where the symbiosis of electronics and
software will make every domestic device “smart”, able not only to
perform a number of specified functions, but also to analyse the
situation around it, accumulate data and produce ready-made solutions.

**In tomorrow’s world, a “thinking” toaster will make your toast** as
you wake up and send a network request to your refrigerator to buy some
more apple jam for the toast. All that will remain for you to do is to
open the door to the courier. Though you may not even have to do this if
your “smart” door is programmed to let the courier in itself. And when
it’s not performing its household duties your toaster will independently
access the network and download upgrades placed on the server by the
manufacturer. You will never have to replace an old toaster with a new,
more functional model — it will look after this itself.

**Ukrainian designers have also managed** to bite off their own “piece
of the cake” in the “smart house” concept, having created a sensation on
Kickstarter with Petcube — a gadget that enables you to observe and play
with your pet via the Internet using a smartphone app. Another “smart”
Ukrainian invention is the Branto remote presence robot. Built in the
form of a sphere, Branto has cameras that provide all-round vision and
picks up sounds and movements to monitor the security of your “smart
home”. Another project that has not gone unnoticed on the international
market is iBlazr — a portable flash that connects to a smartphone or
tablet. It synchronizes with the device’s camera shutter to enable
photography in dark conditions and eliminate the negative effects caused
by incorrect lighting.

**In the future, all spheres of life that can be digitized will be
digitized**: education, sport, healthcare… Pharmaceutical companies are
already working on a Tricorder device combined with a mobile phone. The
gadget will scan the retina of the eye, blood composition and exhaled
air and, potentially, be able to identify any illness known to man on
the basis of 54 biological parameters. The manufacturers promise to make
the device affordable, thereby automatically making good quality
healthcare affordable to the entire planet.

**Software will change traditional industries** beyond recognition. The
world’s biggest taxi firm UBER does not own a single vehicle: it is just
software. AirBnB does not own any rooms, but is perceived by everyone as
the biggest hotel in the world.

**Followers of the concept of technological singularity** maintain that
in the near future, technical progress will become so fast and
sophisticated that it will be beyond human comprehension. How then
should mankind itself change? Not very long ago, DARPA announced the
creation of an implant that will act as a conductor between the human
brain and the digital world. If scientists succeed in bringing their
plans to fruition, the era of Mankind as we know it today will come to
an end.

**This combination of biological and digital information** carrier will
create a superman that is incomparable more intelligent, with an
impeccable memory and the ability to “download” knowledge on any given
subject. Classic higher education will completely lose its value and
your university degree will mean absolutely nothing. Learning will
consist of a continuous mix of educational computer programmes,
electronic books, online lectures and practice. One successful example
of a knowledge aggregator is the Ukrainian educational start-up
Coursmos. By 2016, the platform already boasted over 36,500 courses and
had attracted around 2,000,000 users. Operating within the new paradigm,
Coursmos embraces virtually every sphere of knowledge, from cooking to
business education.

**Analysts predict that just 5 years from now**, the IoT market will be
worth $14.5 bn. And that figure will grow, opening up new niches for
thinking innovators to apply their energies. It is no exaggeration to
say that we stand on the threshold of fascinating times. The
availability of information and the openness of technology and
communication afford vast resources to anyone who is ready to invent and
create, to produce something new or improve what is already there.
Perhaps tomorrow you will be able to give the world some unique
technologies for saving energy, resources and time — all of them so
important in our age. There is no better time to start working on this
than now. Welcome to the world of the future!”



