The Immigration Ban is a Headfake, and We’re Falling For It
===========================================================

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1000/1*VJcXkgHVOBPLY5qXmgr9NA.jpeg)
When I read about the [incredibly active first
week](http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/article/2017/jan/27/heres-what-donald-trump-did-first-week-president-u/)
of the Trump administration, I struggle with two competing narratives
about what’s *really* going on. The first story is simple: the
administration is just doing what it said it would do, literally keeping
its campaign promises. Lots of people won’t agree, but it’s playing to
its base. They’re also not really good at this whole government thing
yet, so [implementation is
shaky](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/29/us/politics/donald-trump-rush-immigration-order-chaos.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=span-ab-top-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news).
The second is more sinister: the **administration is deliberately
testing the limits of governmental checks and balances** to set up a
self-serving, dangerous consolidation of power.

A legitimate argument can be made for the former: a relatively extreme
and inexperienced administration was just put in place, and they haven’t
yet figured out the nuances of government. But a few of the events in
the past 72 hours —the [intentional inclusion of green card
holders](http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/28/politics/donald-trump-travel-ban/index.html)
in the immigration order, the [DHS defiance of a federal
judge](https://twitter.com/RepDonBeyer/status/825797672258961409), and
the timing of Trump’s [shakeup of the National Security
Council ](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/josh-rogin/wp/2017/01/19/inside-trumps-shadow-national-security-council/?utm_term=.d19cb9496c69)— have
pointed to a larger story. Even worse, if that larger story is true, if
the source of this week’s actions is a play to consolidate power, it’s
going really well so far. And that’s because mostly everyone — including
those in protests shutting down airports over the weekend— are playing
right into the administration’s hand.

I obviously can’t pretend to know the intentions of the new President,
but let’s pretend the power consolidation move is what’s actually
happening. In fact, let’s pretend we’re the Trump administration (not
necessarily Trump himself, more likely his inner circle) for a second.
Here’s our playbook:

1.  We launch a series of Executive Orders in the first week.
    Beforehand, we identify one that our opponents will complain loudly
    about and will dominate the news cycle. Immigration ban. Perfect.
2.  We craft the ban to be about 20% more extreme than we actually want
    it to be — say, let’s make the [explicit
    decision](http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/28/politics/donald-trump-travel-ban/index.html)
    to block green card holders from defined countries from entering the
    US, rather than just visa holders. We create some confusion so that
    we can walk back from that part later, but let’s make sure that it’s
    enforced to begin with.
3.  We watch our opposition pour out into the streets protesting the
    extremes of our public measure, exactly as we intended. The protests
    dominate the news, but our base doesn’t watch CNN anyway. The ACLU
    will file motions to oppose the most extreme parts of our measure,
    that’s actually going to be useful too. We don’t actually care if we
    win, that’s why we made it more extreme than it needed to be. But in
    doing so, the lawsuit process will test the loyalty of those
    enforcing what we say.
4.  While the nation’s attention is on our extreme EO, slip a few more
    nuanced moves through. For example, [reconfigure the National
    Security
    Council](https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/josh-rogin/wp/2017/01/19/inside-trumps-shadow-national-security-council/?utm_term=.d020b596f0b2)
    so that it’s led by our inner circle. Or [gut the State
    Department’s](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/29/state-department-purge-trump-foreign-policy)
    ability to resist more extreme moves. That will have massive
    benefits down the road — the NSC are the folks that authorize secret
    assassinations against enemies of the state, including
    American citizens. Almost nobody has time to analyze that move
    closely, and those that do can’t get coverage.
5.  When the lawsuits filed by the ACLU [inevitably
    succeed](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/28/federal-judge-stays-deportations-trump-muslim-executive-order),
    stay silent. Don’t tell the DHS to abide by the what the federal
    judge says, see what they do on their own. If they capitulate to the
    courts, we know our power with the DHS is limited and we need to
    staff it with more loyal people. But if they [continue enforcing our
    EO until we tell them not
    to](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/29/customs-border-protection-agents-trump-muslim-country-travel-ban),
    we know that we can completely ignore the judicial branch later on
    and the DHS will have our back.
6.  Once the DHS has made their move, walk back from the 20% we didn’t
    want in the first place. Let the green card holders in, and pretend
    that’s what we meant all along. The protestors and the ACLU, both
    clamoring to display their efficacy, jump on the moment to declare a
    huge victory. The crowds dissipate, they have to go back to work.
7.  **When the dust settles, we have 100% of the Executive Order we
    originally wanted, we’ve tested the loyalty of a department we’ll
    need later on, we’ve proven we can ignore an entire branch of
    government, and we’ve slipped in some subtle moves that will make
    the next test even easier.**

We’ve just tested the country’s willingness to capitulate to a fascist
regime.

Assuming this narrative is true (again, I have no idea what the
administration intends), the “resistance” is playing right into Trump’s
playbook. The most [vocal
politicians](http://fortune.com/video/2017/01/29/watch-sen-cory-brooker-show-his-support-for-protesters-at-washington-dulles-international-airport/)
could be seen at rallies, close to the headlines. The protests
themselves did exactly what they were intended to: dominate the news
cycle and channel opposition anger towards a relatively insignificant
piece of the puzzle. I’m not saying that green card holders should be
stuck in airports — far from it. I’m saying there might be a much larger
picture here, and the immigration ban is a distraction.

So for those that believe that the power consolidation narrative is true
and want to oppose it, how does that happen?

First, stop believing that protests alone do much good. Protests
galvanize groups and display strong opposition, but [they’re not
sufficient](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/19/womens-march-washington-occupy-protest).
Not only are they relatively [ineffective at changing
policy](https://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2014/04/why-street-protests-dont-work/360264/),
they’re also falsely cathartic to those protesting. Protestors get all
kinds of feel-good that they’re among fellow believers and standing up
for what’s right, and they go home feeling like they’ve done their part.
Even if protestors gain mild, symbolic concessions, the fact that their
anger has an outlet is useful to the other side. Do protest, but be very
wary of going home feeling like you’ve done your job. You haven’t.

Second, pay journalists to watch for the head fake. That’s their job.
Become a paying subscriber to news outlets, then actively ask them to
more deeply cover moves like the NSC shakeup. We can no longer
breathlessly focus media attention on easy stories like the immigration
ban. The real story is much more nuanced and boring — until it’s not.

Third, popular attention must focus less on whether we agree with what
the government is doing, and more on whether the system of checks and
balances we have in place is working. It is a *much* bigger deal that
the DHS felt they could ignore a federal court than that Trump signed an
EO blocking green card holders in the first place. It is a *much* bigger
deal that Trump removed a permanent military presence from the NSC than
that he issued a temporary stay on immigration. The immigration ban may
be more viscerally upsetting, but the other moves are potentially far
more dangerous.

Once again, I’m desperately hoping that none of this narrative is
actually true, and that we merely have a well-intentioned administration
with some execution problems. I’m also hoping and praying that the
structure of our democracy is resilient even to the most sophisticated
attacks. I’m hoping that the better angels of our nature will prevail.
But with each passing day, the evidence tilts more in the other
direction.



