![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/800/1*8cJCUzVPPB_ze2bbL1ckPw.jpeg)
Used under license by Adobe, Inc.
**Trump is Destroying America’s Brand Value**
=============================================

*America’s Brand as a “Nation of Laws” is at risk of irreparable harm due to Trump’s flagarant violation of the Constitution’s Emolument Clause.*
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

*In addition to the human cost of Trump’s executive orders this past
week, what will his actions cost American businesses in terms of
goodwill around the globe?*

Business people care about their brands. Successful leaders and great
managers hold their brands in high regard and take great care to
safeguard them for future generations. Think about the brands of
Coca-Cola, Apple and Starbucks. Think about how much effort is taken to
care for the inegrity of their brands. Think about what would happen to
the stock value of these Brands should it be discovered that they were
operating in violation of the Constitution? Right now, America is
dealing with this very situtation. Think that Nations can’t suffer from
brand mismanagement? Look how long it took Germany to rebuild global
trust after being ruled by a man responsible for the most terrifying
brand strategy the world has ever known.

Ultimately brand value is based upon the experience of that brand upon
the marketplace. A brand is not merely a logo, or a tagline. As the
Godfather of modern Branding, Walter Landor stated, “A Brand is a
promise.” Walter knew that a brand’s ability to connect with people was
only part of the equation. A company’s brand must imbue its customers
with a feeling of connectedness with the brand and in-turn, itself.

If there is one brand attribute that is most closely associated with the
United States, it’s that we are a Nation guided by the rule of law. We
are not a Nation ruled by Nobility nor Dictators but by the “People”.

If we have only one thing to cling to, it’s that we abide by our laws or
we face the consequences. Our Executive Branch is entrusted to
“Preserve, Defend and Protect” the Constitution of the United States.
The Constitution is our foundational legal framework from which all
other laws are judged.

Law and Order is our Brand. Law and Order is what Candidate Trump ran on
to achieve his win of the Presidency.

The fatal mistake Trump has made is that he is threatening America’s
number one brand attribute — “Our Contitutional Rule of Law”. He seems
to believe that his own Trump brand is bigger than the brand of the
United States (yes, in the modern sense of the word, the US is a brand
too).

Here’s the rub: Trump’s life is all about his brand. Today his very life
is at stake as his brand legacy requires that he pulls through whatever
he intends to do to as President, otherwise his worth and his very
identity will be irreparably harmed. Therefore he will not stop until he
has either achieved his objective or is legally removed from office.
This means that he will continue to break the law without regard for the
legions of people who have sacrificed their lives to defend it.

The good news is that the brand of The United States has a lot more
history and credibility and goodwill established than does Trump. This
means that America can withstand the complete embarrassment that Trump
has become and still regain its good standing– as long as it does so
expeditiously.

Consider that Apple designs a product in the future that is faulty. As a
company widely identified as the best in its industry in customer
satisfaction, Apple deploys a rapid plan to address the matter to
rectify the situation. This means that Apple can afford to make mistakes
in its product line and still maintain its overall promise to its
customer and the Market. A brand does not need to be perfect in order to
thrive but it must be vigilant in meeting the needs of its customers in
order to weather a storm and maintain the promise of its Brand.

Conversely a company like Volkswagen who has struggled for relevance for
over the past decade, rigged its own engine systems to report false data
about their emissions. Car and Driver reported that, VW cars produced
“heavier nitrogen-oxide emissions (NOx) — a smog-forming pollutant
linked to lung cancer — up to 40 times higher than the federal limit.”
VW, as large as it is, has lost its way and continues to lose
marketshare and favor.

As of today, Donald Trump is in direct violation of the Constitution of
the United States. His international businesses receive foreign monies
which is in direct violation of the United Staes Constitution’s Nobility
Clause, also known as the “Emoluments Clause”. This clause was written
in order to prevent foreign nations the ability to influence our
government officials from working against the self-interest of the
citizens of the United States.

To get America’s Brand back on track, the United States must show the
World that it can quickly correct inherent conflicts within its system
of government. Congress must regain the trust of Americans and the World
and prove that no person is above the Law. It will have much repair work
to do, but first, it must force Donald Trump who as of today is both in
violation of the Constitution and is challenging our Judicial Branch to
place him in Contempt for ignoring the ruling of a Federal Judge.

Prosecuting Trump for violation of the Emoluments Clause of the
Constitution is the critical first step to show that America is truly a
Nation ruled by Law. Loosing that essential brand attribute may cause
irreparable harm to our standing in the world. Allowing Trump to
continue operating while in violation of our Nation’s highest law is not
just bad for business, it’s bad for America.

If you agree, the easiest thing you can do to rectify this situation is
to encourage our Congress to demand that Donald Trump either complies
with the rule of law, resign from office or face Impeachment. You can
view and sign the official Whitehouse.gov petition here:

Donald Trump: Resign as President of the United States in Violation of
the Emoluments Clause. Release Your Tax Returns  
https://petitions.whitehouse.gov/petition/donald-trump-resign-president-united-states-violation-emoluments-clause-release-your-tax-returns



