[5.10.42](https://orwelldiaries.wordpress.com/2012/10/04/5-10-42/)
------------------------------------------------------------------

Posted on [4
October](https://orwelldiaries.wordpress.com/2012/10/04/5-10-42/) by
[orwelldiaries](https://orwelldiaries.wordpress.com/author/orwelldiaries/)

New viceroy of India to be appointed shortly. No clue as to who he will
be. Some say General Auchinleck – who, it is said, gets on well with
leftwing Indians.

Long talk with Bradner, who is back after his 6 months tour in India.
\[1\] His conclusions so depressing that I can hardly bring myself to
write them down. Briefly – affairs are much worse in India than anyone
here is allowed to realise, the situation is in fact retrievable but
won’t be retrieved because the government is determined to make no real
concessions, hell will break loose when and if there is a Japanese
invasion, and our broadcasts are utterly useless because nobody listens
to them. Bradner did say, however, that the Indians listen to BBC news,
because they regard it as more truthful than that given out by Tokio or
Berlin. He considers that we should broadcast news and music and nothing
else. This is what I have been saying for some time past.

*\[1\] Laurence Bradner (1903-?) author and lecturer in English
literature in India for twelve years before the war, was employed by the
BBC as Intelligence Officer, Eastern Service, 1941-44. In 1954 his study
George Orwell was published. Pages 8-9 give a succinct insight to Orwell
at the BBC:*

*“Everyone liked and respected him and he was the inspiration of that
rudimentary Third Programme which was sent out to the Indian student. He
soon sensed that the audience for the programme was not so large as was
thought by the senior officials and, before I went to India early in
1942 to find out, he gave a great deal of time to discussing the
problems with me. I found that our programmes were at a time of day when
nobody was listening and that they could hardly be heard because the
signal was so weak. Very few students had access to wireless sets…*

*I was always grateful to Orwell while we worked together in the B.B.C.
He laughed very readily at the nonsense that went on, and made it
tolerable. This did not interfere with his sense of responsibility, for
he knew how important radio propaganda could be, if intelligently
organised, and he worked very hard on his own talks, which were always
good and usually brilliant. His voice was a great handicap. Thin and
flat, it did not go over well on shortwave broadcasting”. \[The quality
of Orwell’s voice had been badly affected by his being shot through the
throat when fighting in Spain.\]*

*Bradner goes on to refer to the proposal to put into print the good
talks that were not being heard, and it was he who suggested that Blair
broadcast under the name Orwell (see CW, XIV, pp. 89 and 100-2). After
the war, he was Director of Publications for the British Council.*



