A new theory promises to unlock your body’s full potential—and is actually scientifically sound
===============================================================================================

[Scott Carney](#) February 02, 2017

![A competitor participates in the Tough Mudder challenge near
Winchester in southern England October 25, 2014. REUTERS/Luke MacGregor
(BRITAIN - Tags: SPORT SOCIETY ATHLETICS) -
RTR4BK4H](https://qzprod.files.wordpress.com/2017/02/tough-mudder-jumping-through-air.jpg?quality=80&strip=all&w=320)

It's not about being superhuman—it's about becoming more human.
(Reuters/Luke MacGregor)

##### Written by

[Scott Carney](#)

February 02, 2017

Today tens of thousands of people are discovering that the environment
contains hidden tools for hacking the nervous system. But no matter what
they might be able to accomplish, they’re not superhuman—the fortitude
they find comes from within the body itself. When they forego a few
creature comforts and delve more deeply into their own biology, they’re
becoming *more human.*

For at least half a century, the conventional wisdom about maintaining
good physical health has rested on the twin pillars of diet and
exercise. While those are no doubt vital, there’s an equally important,
but completely ignored, third pillar: environmental stimulation.

Anatomically, modern humans have lived on the planet for almost 200,000
years. That means your officemate who sits on a rolling chair beneath
fluorescent lights all day has pretty much the same basic body as the
prehistoric caveman who made spear points out of flint to hunt antelope.
To get from there to here, humans faced countless challenges as we fled
predators, froze in snowstorms, sought shelter from the rain, hunted and
gathered our food, and continued breathing despite suffocating heat.

Until very recently, there was not a time when comfort could be taken
for granted—there was always a balance between the effort we expended
and the downtime we earned. For the bulk of that time, we managed these
feats without even a shred of what anyone today would consider modern
technology. Instead, we had to be strong to survive.

Despite all of our technology, our bodies are just not ready for a world
so completely tamed by our desire for comfort.Over the course of
hundreds of thousands of years, humans invented some things that made
life easier—fire, cooking, stone tools, fur skins, and foot bindings—but
we were still largely at the mercy of nature. About 5,000 years ago, at
the dawn of recorded history, things got a little easier still as we
domesticated various animal species to do work for us, built better
shelters, and carried more sophisticated gear. As human culture
advanced, it all was getting incrementally easier. And then, sometime in
the early 1900s, our technological prowess became so powerful that it
broke our fundamental biological links to the world around us. Indoor
plumbing, heating systems, grocery stores, cars, and electric lighting
now let us control and fine-tune our environment so thoroughly that many
of us can live in what amounts to a perpetual state of homeostasis.

We have a nervous system that is almost perfectly attenuated for
homeostasis, which is the effortless state where the environment meets
every physical need. Our nervous system automatically responds to
challenges in the world around us—triggering muscle contractions,
releasing hormones, modulating body temperature, and performing a
million other tasks that give us an edge in a particular moment.

But barring an urgent need for survival, the human body is perfectly
content to simply rest and do nothing. The programming that makes us
gluttons for the easy life didn’t emerge out of nowhere: Almost every
organism struggles against the environment that it inhabits. Every
creature, whether it is an amoeba or a great ape, needs motivation to
overcome the challenges of the world around it: Comfort and pleasure are
the two most powerful and immediate rewards that exist.

What is comfort? It’s not really a feeling as much as it is an absence
of things that aren’t comfortable. We sate our thirst, don layers of
clothing on cold winter days, and clean our bodies because that yearning
for comfort is hardwired into our brains. It’s what Freud called the
“pleasure principle.”

Effortless comfort has made us fat, lazy, and increasingly in ill
health.It doesn’t matter what the weather is like outside—scorching
heat, blizzards, thunderstorms, or just fine summer days—a person can
now wake up long past when the sun rises, eat a breakfast chock-full of
fruits flown in from a climate halfway across the globe, head to work in
a temperature-controlled car, spend the day in an office, and come home
without ever feeling the outside air for more than a few minutes. Modern
humans are the very first species since the jellyfish that can almost
completely ignore their natural obstacles to survival.

Yet comfort’s golden age has a hidden dark side. While we can imagine
what a difficult environment might feel like, very few of us routinely
experience the stresses of our forebears. With no challenge to overcome,
frontier to press, or threat to flee from, the humans of this millennium
are overstuffed, overheated, and under-stimulated. The struggles of us
privileged denizens of the developed world—getting a job, funding a
retirement, getting kids into a good school, posting the right social
media update—pale in comparison to the daily threats of death or
deprivation that our ancestors faced. Despite this apparent victory,
success over the natural world hasn’t made our bodies stronger. Quite
the opposite, in fact: Effortless comfort has made us fat, lazy, and
increasingly in ill health.

The developed world no longer suffers from diseases of deficiency.
Instead we get the diseases of excess. This century has seen an
explosion of obesity, diabetes, chronic pain, hypertension, and even a
resurgence of gout. Millions of people suffer from autoimmune
ailments—from arthritis to allergies, and from lupus to Crohn’s and
Parkinson’s disease—where the body literally attacks itself. It is
almost as if there are so few external threats to contend with that all
our stored energy instead wreaks havoc on our insides.

There is a growing consensus among many scientists and athletes that
humans were not built for eternal and effortless homeostasis. Evolution
made us seek comfort because comfort was never the norm. Human biology
needs stress—not the sort of stress that damages muscle, gets us eaten
by a bear, or degrades our physiques, but the sort of environmental and
physical oscillations that invigorate our nervous systems.

![](https://qzprod.files.wordpress.com/2017/01/15-shirtless-scott-with-poles.jpg?quality=80&strip=all&w=50)
Author Scott Carney hiking shirtless in the snow. (Laura Krantz)
There is a growing consensus among many scientists and athletes that
humans were not built for eternal and effortless homeostasis.Muscles,
organs, nerves, fat tissue, and hormones all respond and change because
of input they get from the outside world. Critically, some external
signals set off a cascade of physiological responses that skip the
conscious parts of our brains and connect to a place that controls a
well-spring of hidden physical reactions called collectively
fight-or-flight responses. For example, a plunge into ice-cold water not
only triggers a number of processes to warm the body, but also tweaks
insulin production, tightens the circulatory system, and heightens
mental awareness. A person actually has to get uncomfortable and
experience that frigid cold if they want to initiate those systems. But
who wants to do that? The bulk of us don’t see environmental stress in
the same light as we do, say, exercise; there doesn’t seem to be an
obvious reason to leave our shells of environmental bliss.

Maybe that’s not entirely fair. In recent years a counterculture has
tried to push back against technological overzealousness to reclaim some
of our animal nature. They’ve shucked fancy footwear for flat shoes (and
some cases no shoes at all). They’ve turned away from climate-controlled
exercise gyms in favor of rough obstacle courses and boot camps that
force muscle groups to work in unison. They’re hacking their diets:
eating tubers and meat and foregoing grains reminiscent of our
Paleolithic ancestors. At least eight million people have bought a
product called the Squatty Potty, a device for the toilet to help a
person poop in a squatting stance like our pre-toileted forebears did.

Millions more sign up for obstacle course races that feature electrified
grids, pools of freezing water, and grueling climbs over wooden
barriers. They compete until they are so bone tired that their muscles
shake. They puke in the mud with tears in their eyes. It’s not
exhilaration they’re seeking: it’s suffering. Their pain is so much on
the forefront of the experience that the industry of obstacle courses
and boot camps are sometimes called “sufferfests.” Think about that for
a second: There are companies out there that literally make fortunes by
selling suffering. How did pain become a luxury good? Could it be that
there is a specific sort of pain that might serve a hidden evolutionary
function?

![](https://qzprod.files.wordpress.com/2017/01/5-snowy-hof.jpg?quality=80&strip=all&w=50)
Wim Hof, pioneer of environmental conditioning, hiking in the snow.
(Scott Carney)
Advanced technology permeates everything we do, but the people who
decide to abandon some of that comfort for the rawness of nature
represent an indigenous ethos that has almost been wiped out by a
societal desire for comfort. They’re learning that if they embrace the
way their bodies respond to the natural world, they can unlock a hidden
wellspring of animal strength.

For most of our evolutionary past, comfort was a rare treat and stress
was a constant. The lower parts of our brain formed in environments
where there were always physical challenges to overcome, and those
challenges were part of what made us human in the first place. Despite
all of our technology, our bodies are just not ready for a world so
completely tamed by our desire for comfort. Without stimulation, the
responses that were designed to fight environmental challenges don’t
always lie dormant. Sometimes they turn inward and wreak havoc on our
insides.

This book is largely about what happens when we reexamine our
relationship with the environment and see ourselves as a part of
something bigger than the comfortable spaces we mostly choose to live
in. It explores how changing the environment around the body also
fundamentally changes the body itself. More importantly, it shows how it
is possible to manipulate our external environment to trigger autonomic
responses in predictable ways. Once you realize that you can manipulate
deep parts of your physiology by intentionally tweaking identifiable
pre-programmed responses, you can begin to cede aspects of that
automation to your consciousness.

It’s a strange claim to make for an investigative journalist who has
spent much of his career trying to debunk false prophets and medical
voodoo. For that matter, it’s an odd statement for a man whose spirit
animal is still mostly made of “jelly.” But these findings are grounded
in current science and the real lives of people around the globe who
have taken control of their bodies to an extraordinary extent.

*This is an edited excerpt from Scott’s book,* [What Doesn’t Kill Us:
How Freezing Water, Extreme Altitude and Environmental Conditioning Will
Renew Our Lost Evolutionary
Strength](https://www.amazon.com/What-Doesnt-Kill-Environmental-Conditioning/dp/1623366909?tag=quartz07-20).
*You can follow Scott on Twitter at
[@sgcarney](https://twitter.com/sgcarney). Learn how to [write for
Quartz
Ideas](https://qz.com/635686/the-complete-guide-to-writing-for-quartz-ideas/).
We welcome your comments at <ideas@qz.com>.*



