The psychology of why 94 deaths from terrorism are scarier than 301,797 deaths from guns
========================================================================================

[Jenny Anderson](https://qz.com/author/jandersonqz/) January 31, 2017

![Supporters at a "Freedom Rally" wave U.S. flags in support of not
building a mosque near Ground
Zero...](https://qzprod.files.wordpress.com/2017/01/rtr2r5qg.jpg?quality=80&strip=all&w=320)

Emotions get in the way. (Reuters/Hugh Gentry)

##### Written by

[Jenny Anderson](https://qz.com/author/jandersonqz/)

January 31, 2017

According to the [New America
Foundation](https://www.newamerica.org/in-depth/terrorism-in-america/what-threat-united-states-today/#americas-layered-defenses),
jihadists killed 94 people inside the United States between 2005 and
2015. During that same time period, 301,797 people in the US were shot
dead,
[Politifact](http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2015/oct/05/viral-image/fact-checking-comparison-gun-deaths-and-terrorism-/)reports.

At first blush, these numbers might seem to indicate that Donald Trump’s
temporary ban on immigrants from seven countries—a goal he said was
intended to “protect the American people from terrorist attacks by
foreign nationals admitted to the United States”—is utterly misguided.

But Trump is right about at least one thing: Americans are more afraid
of terrorism than they are of guns, despite the fact that guns are 3,210
times more likely to kill them.

Chapman University has conducted a [Survey of American
Fears](https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2016/10/161012160030.htm)
for more than three years. It asks 1,500 adults what they fear most. It
organizes the fears into categories that include personal fears,
conspiracy theories, terrorism, natural disasters, paranormal fears, and
more recently, fear of Muslims.

In 2016, Americans’ number-one fear was “corruption of government
officials”—the same top fear as in 2015. Terrorist attacks came second.
In fact, of the top five fears, two are terror-related. And number five
is not fear of guns but fear of government *restrictions* on guns. Fear
of a loved one dying—whether by gun violence or anything else—came next.

One reason people’s fears don’t line up with actual risks is that our
brains are wired by evolution to make fast judgements which are not
always backed up by logical reasoning. “Our emotions push us to make
snap judgments that once were sensible—but may not be anymore,” Maia
Szalavitz, a child psychiatrist, wrote in 2008 in [Psychology
Today](https://www.psychologytoday.com/articles/200801/10-ways-we-get-the-odds-wrong).

Also, fear strengthens memory, she wrote, so that one-off catastrophes
like plane crashes or terrorist attacks embed in our memories, while we
blank the horrible accidents we see daily on the highway. “As a result,
we overestimate the odds of dreadful but infrequent events and
underestimate how risky ordinary events are,” Szalavitz explained.

[Risk
perception](http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/christopher.hsee/vita/papers/riskasfeelings.pdf)
(pdf) used to be based on an analytical equation: you multiply the
probability of an event by the potential damage of its outcome. But Paul
Slovic, a professor of psychology at the University of Oregon,
[understood the powerful role of
emotions](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3563507) in
decision-making and altered that equation, noting that many things
affect how we perceive risk:

-   do you trust the person you are dealing with
-   control vs. lack of control (lack of control inflates
    risk perceptions)
-   is it catastrophic or chronic (catastrophic inflates
    risk perceptions)
-   does it incite dread or anger (dread inflates risk perceptions)
-   uncertainty (lack of knowledge about something inflates
    risk perceptions)

“Most people do not distinguish well between a one-in-a-thousand risk
and a one-in-a-million risk,” said Mark Egan, an associate advisor at
the Behavioral Insights Group in London.

Baruch Fischhoff, a decision scientist at Carnegie Mellon, said that the
unpredictability of terrorism can make it scarier than something like a
car crash. “Terrorism is not like motor vehicle accidents, where past
performance predicts future performance,” he said. “Terrorism could
change and it’s not irrational for people to react differently to an
uncertain risk.”

That’s exactly what Americans did after the terror attacks of Sept. 11,
2001. People began flying less and driving more. The result, estimated
Gerd Gigerenzer, a German risk specialist, was that [1,595 more
Americans
died](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/05/september-11-road-deaths)
in road accidents during the 12 months after 9/11 than would have
otherwise.

Michael Rothschild, then an emeritus professor at the University of
Wisconsin, [calculated some of the risks we
face](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/05/september-11-road-deaths):

-   One in 6 million: Risk of dying in a plane hijacking, assuming you
    fly four times a month and hijackers destroy one plane every year.
    (Just to be clear, since 9/11, hijackers have not destroyed any
    flights in the US.)
-   One in 7,000: the risk of dying in a car accident in any given year
-   One in 600: the risk of dying from cancer in any given year

According to [data compiled from the Centers for Disease
Control](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/todd-r-miller/the-freakonomics-of-extre_b_11821634.html),
over 2005-2014, an average of 11,737 Americans a year were shot dead by
another American (21 of them by toddlers), 737 were killed by falling
out of bed, and nine were killed by Islamic jihadists—who in most cases
were US citizens, not immigrants (Nearly twice as many [Americans kill
themselves](https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/suicide.htm) with guns as
kill each other).

Rothschild blamed politicians for overstating the terrorist risk. Media
saturation is also to blame. Having ready access to images of every
atrocity known to mankind makes us prone to what behavioral scientists
call “availability bias,” the tendency to give weight to what comes to
mind most easily. The blanket coverage of the Sept. 11th attacks
successfully seared the images of terrorism on our brains; shootings,
which happen every day and—with the exception of a few mass
shootings—are largely ignored, have less of an effect.

“We over-react to visible threats,” said Max Bazerman, co-director of
the Center for Public Leadership at the Harvard Kennedy School, and an
expert on decision-making. “When there is someone out to get you, it is
more visible than when you are silently dying in a hospital.”

After the Boston Marathon bombing in 2013, Roxane Cohen Silver and two
co-authors [looked at what
caused](http://www.pnas.org/content/111/1/93.abstract) more acute
stress: being at or near the bombing itself, or being exposed to it in
the media. They found “\[r\]epeated bombing-related media exposure was
associated with higher acute stress than was direct exposure.”

President Trump may believe he is responding to people’s outsized fears
of terrorism. Unfortunately, his [hastily arranged executive
order](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/29/us/politics/donald-trump-rush-immigration-order-chaos.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=a-lede-package-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news)
won’t work—not least because, as [the Wall Street Journal
found](http://www.wsj.com/articles/countries-under-u-s-entry-ban-arent-main-sources-of-terror-attacks-1485708300)
(paywall), “of 180 people charged with jihadist terrorism-related crimes
or who died before being charged” only 11 came from the seven countries
banned in Trump’s order. He didn’t ban people from Saudi Arabia,
Lebanon, the United Arab Emirates, or Egypt—the home countries of the 19
perpetrators of the 9/11 attacks.

***Correction: Due to an editing error, a previous version of this story
said that 737 people died annually from being shot by someone else. It
is 11,737.***



