Amazon beats profit expectations—revenue, not so much
=====================================================

[Ananya Bhattacharya](https://qz.com/author/abhattacharyaqz/) February
02, 2017

![epa04858460 (FILE) A file picture dated 24 October 2014 showing
workers at the Amazon e-trader's new logistics center in Sady, near
Poznan, west Poland. Online retailer Amazon surprised analysts 24 July
2015 with better-than-expected earnings for the second quarter after
sales for its cloud-computing division, Amazon Web Services, increased
81 per cent from the year before. The Seattle-based company posted net
income of 92 million dollars (83.8 million euros) for the quarter that
ended June 30, reversing the net losses of 57 million dollars of the
previous quarter and 126 million dollars in the year-before period.
EPA/Jakub Kaczmarczyk POLAND
OUT](https://qzprod.files.wordpress.com/2017/02/amazon.jpeg?quality=80&strip=all&w=320)

Get ready for the ride. (EPA/Jakub Kaczmarczyk)

##### Written by

[Ananya Bhattacharya](https://qz.com/author/abhattacharyaqz/)

February 02, 2017

Amazon posted a profit in the fourth quarter of 2016, but missed analyst
expectations on revenue. Plans for global domination are still on,
though.

On Thursday, the online retailer reported [net sales of $43.7
billion](http://phx.corporate-ir.net/phoenix.zhtml?c=97664&p=irol-newsArticle&ID=2241835)
for the fourth quarter of 2016, up 22% over the same quarter a year ago.
Those numbers [fell short of analyst
expectations](http://www.cnbc.com/2017/02/02/amazon-earnings-fourth-quarter-q4-2016.html),
sending Amazon’s stock down more than 4% in after-hours trading. When
asked on the company’s earnings call about the revenue miss, Amazon CFO
Brian Olsavsky said revenue would have been up 24% if not for an $800
million hit due to foreign exchange rates.

Net income for the quarter was $749 million, or $1.54 per share,
compared with $482 million, or $1 a share, a year earlier. The company
also issued guidance on first-quarter revenue and operating income that
was below estimates.

While Amazon beat profit estimates—analysts had expected earnings of
$1.37 per share—that’s [no longer
enough](https://qz.com/745151/amazons-ability-to-turn-a-profit-is-no-longer-a-cool-trick/)
to satisfy its shareholders, who are looking for details on how Amazon
Web Services and Amazon Prime are faring. The former added more than
$3.5 billion to the company’s revenue in the fourth quarter, but sales
growth continued to slow. (Amazon does not break out Prime metrics, much
to investors’ chagrin.)

It may have been a mixed quarter, but Amazon still had a *very* busy
2016, much of which was spent laying down a foundation for future plans.
On the hardware side, the company’s Echo speaker, which comes equipped
with virtual assistant Alexa, has been a roaring success. Echo device
sales grew nine-fold in the 2016 holiday season over the same period in
2015.

On its earnings call on Thursday, Amazon said it has added more than
4,000 Alexa “skills” since October, and added Alexa capabilities to its
tablets and the Fire TV in the fourth quarter. More broadly, Alexa [can
also now be
found](https://qz.com/880432/ces-2017-the-best-new-technology-products-according-to-quartz/)
in cars, smart fridges, and robots ([and
elsewhere](http://www.theverge.com/ces/2017/1/4/14169550/amazon-alexa-so-many-things-at-ces-2017)).
That proliferation has created a “great network effect,” Amazon director
of investor relations Darin Manney said on the earnings call.

Amazon has also executed a massive expansive of Prime and Prime Video.
The former [launched in China in
October](https://techcrunch.com/2016/10/28/amazon-prime-launches-in-china/),
opening the door for Amazon to have an impact in the world’s most
populous market. Prime Video is now available in [more than 200
countries](http://www.theverge.com/2016/12/14/13951464/amazon-prime-video-available-prices-subscription-grand-tour).
Amazon has also made inroads in India, both by [pumping huge amounts of
money](https://qz.com/701919/amazon-has-just-given-a-3-billion-reason-for-flipkart-and-snapdeal-to-worry/)
into the country and by creating local content with [Bollywood’s biggest
production
houses](https://qz.com/791420/amazon-amzn-taps-into-bollywood-with-karan-johars-dharma-productions-to-lure-more-prime-subscribers-in-india/).

Amazon warehouses shipped more than 2.5 billion units on behalf of
sellers last year and, logistically speaking, the company is setting the
stage for an even larger e-commerce and distribution presence: It wants
to sell more types of products to more people, and deliver them faster
than ever. Amazon spent $5.7 billion on fulfillment centers in the
fourth quarter, up from $4.5 billion in the fourth quarter of 2015.
Amazon also
[doubled](http://www.cnbc.com/2017/01/04/amazon-doubles-deliveries-in-2016-for-third-party-sellers.html)
the number of items it shipped for third-party vendors last year, which
could also have contributed to revenue fall-off (Amazon makes more money
shipping its own goods).

The company added 26 new warehouses last year (mostly in North America)
and has started bolstering its fulfillment centers with a [growing
automated
workforce.](https://qz.com/709541/amazon-is-just-beginning-to-use-robots-in-its-warehouses-and-theyre-already-making-a-huge-difference/)
Last month, Amazon [announced
plans](https://qz.com/884004/amazon-is-creating-100000-new-us-jobs-for-humans/)
to create more than 100,000 full-time jobs in the US over the next 18
months.

On the delivery front, Amazon has literally taken flight, [lining up a
fleet of
planes](http://www.recode.net/2016/8/5/12382052/amazon-prime-air-plane)
and managing its first [drone
delivery](https://qz.com/862980/the-first-amazon-primeair-drone-delivery-landed-today-13-minutes-after-the-order-was-placed-amzn/)
(a 13-minute journey in the UK to deliver an Amazon Fire stick and a bag
of popcorn). Although the drone service is still in the testing phase,
it may ([rules
permitting](https://qz.com/712466/the-us-commercial-drone-industry-is-finally-governed-by-real-rules/))
soon expand to other parts of the world.

Seen altogether, Amazon’s initiatives seem geared at establishing itself
the world’s top shopping resource, whether “shopping” means needing a
book in two days or a bag of candy in two hours. Already, more people
[search Amazon than
Google](http://searchengineland.com/survey-amazon-beats-google-starting-point-product-search-252980)
when looking for a product. While this kind of expansion takes time, and
money, there’s already evidence that Amazon is figuring out the
economics: In the fourth quarter, it spent $4.5 billion on fulfillment
costs (i.e. getting stuff to customers), down from $5.7 billion in the
same quarter last year.

Amid a sea of projects aimed at helping people shop from their couches,
Amazon did have one unique proposition in 2016: a brick-and-mortar
presence. In December, the company introduced [Amazon Go grocery
stores](https://qz.com/853205/amazon-amzn-launches-a-new-grocery-store-called-amazon-go-that-could-mean-the-end-of-checkout-lines-and-millions-of-cashier-jobs/),
which let shoppers buy items without a checkout, or any human
interaction at all. It will soon open a [drive-up grocery
store](http://www.geekwire.com/2017/its-alive-amazons-drive-up-grocery-store-in-seattle-lights-up-but-still-no-word-on-opening/)
in Seattle, and is slowly rolling out [physical
bookstores](http://www.forbes.com/sites/ellenduffer/2017/01/31/amazon-opening-bookstore-in-manhattan/#2a427cb62f24).
During the earnings call on Thursday, Manney said more such locations
are on the agenda: “We think the bookstores, for instance, are a really
great way for customers to engage with our devices and see them, touch
them, and become fans.”



