What do software engineers who earn $500,000 a year do?
=======================================================

[Amin Ariana](#) July 29, 2015

![It‘s all about the guy with the purple
bucket.](https://qzprod.files.wordpress.com/2015/07/main-qimg-677b8561bbab5e6ab8bbff19c77563af-e1438193574504.jpeg?quality=80&strip=all&w=320)

It‘s all about the guy with the purple bucket. (Amin Ariana)

##### Written by

[Amin Ariana](#)

July 29, 2015

*This question originally appeared on [Quora](http://www.quora.com/):
[What kind of jobs do software engineers who earn $500k per year
do?](https://www.quora.com/What-kind-of-jobs-do-software-engineers-who-earn-500k-per-year-do/)*
*[Answer](https://www.quora.com/What-kind-of-jobs-do-software-engineers-who-earn-500k-per-year-do/answer/Amin-Ariana)
by [Amin Ariana](https://www.quora.com/Amin-Ariana), Innovation Growth
Engineer.*

Disclosure: I’m an ex-Googler. This answer does not represent the
company.

The premise of the question is somewhat misguided in that there are no
$500,000 guaranteed “earnings” out there for engineers. Unusual pay is
often a combination of salary and [restricted stock
units](http://www.quora.com/What-are-Restricted-Stock-Units-How-does-it-benefit-an-employee)
(RSU).

To explain what you’d need to do to get there, let me offer an analogy:

If you’re a worker in a village who supplies said village with water,
you are valuable to its people. There are two types of workers:

Type one worker
---------------

Grabs an empty bucket or two, goes to the sweet water lake, fills them
up, comes back, and makes twenty people happy. He gets to drink some of
that water along the way, and once he gets back, takes some of the water
home.

Type two worker
---------------

Disregards how much of a “fair share” of water he’s getting. Instead of
grabbing a bucket, he grabs a shovel and a little cup, and disappears
for a while. He’s digging a stream from the lake towards the village.
Often he disappoints people for having returned from weeks of work with
an empty cup. But the elders in the village for some reason believe in
him and want to keep him (and throw him a bone so that he doesn’t starve
for a little while). Some day, he suddenly shows up with a constantly
flowing stream of water behind his back. He puts the type one workers
out of the water delivery business. They’ll have to go find a different
activity and “team” to work with. The type two worker, depending on how
much control they retained on that stream, gets to own a good chunk of
it. Because the village wants to acquire and integrate that stream, they
trade the ownership of that stream for equal-value ownership in the
village itself, typically in the form of land or such to the type two
worker.

Let me now tell you a real story:

I was in Monterey Bay for New Year’s this year. I stood there with my
wife, watching a young guy start to dig a hole. My wife was enjoying the
general vibe of the beach, where everyone was busy ignoring the guy. I
pointed to him from the top of the observation spot and told my wife
“Watch. In 30 minutes, all these people will be digging for this guy.”

Thirty minutes later, he had managed to dig a tiny stream from his
sandcastle/moat to the ocean. The water had to come uphill from the
ocean to fill his moat, so he was busy changing the slope of the stream
to favor the moat. Five minutes later, observing children started
digging with him. Ten minutes later, a few grown-ups started digging.
Fifteen minutes later, the timid foreigners with cameras in hand started
digging. In 60 minutes, one type two worker had managed to inspire 15
type one workers to complete a flowing stream of water.

At the top of this post is a photo I took of the completed project, to
forever commemorate my bet on the power of an individual. The guy with
the purple bucket is the founder of that stream, though you wouldn’t
know it just by looking at the picture. Here it is again:

![](https://qzprod.files.wordpress.com/2015/07/main-qimg-677b8561bbab5e6ab8bbff19c77563af-e1438193574504.jpeg?quality=80&strip=all&w=50)
It‘s all about the guy with the purple bucket. (Amin Ariana)
The overlooked detail is that not all sweat creates equal value. The
type two worker was willing to break some rules, becoming an outcast and
going hungry for an indeterminate period of time to create an automated
stream of wealth for the village. Worker one expects to “get paid” this
value by performing “skills” or “tasks.” The basis of this line of
reasoning doesn’t yield the desired results. The key difference is
risk-taking with no guarantees.

Arguably almost all of the pioneers of the village itself (in this case
Google) were type two workers who held their thirst for years before
establishing the stream of billions of dollars. The folks making big
RSUs either:

1.  From the early days, were responsible for having created a major
    core value.
2.  Created new value accidentally as a side project that turned out to
    be valuable.
3.  Left the village to start another one
4.  Somehow (unlikely) have monopolistic knowledge about a value stream.

Nothing ventured, nothing gained.

A number of people have indicated that they have a hard time putting
this parable in the frame of their reality. Some question the
negotiation tactics needed by the employee to secure the level of equity
that would be appropriate to compensate for their contribution to a
company. A recent concrete story sheds more light:

In May 2009, a career type one worker applied for a job at Twitter. He
was turned down. In Aug. 2009, he applied for a job at Facebook. He was
turned down again. He decided to set out on an “adventure,” and picked
up type two work, digging a stream of revenue from the Lake of
Humanity’s communication needs to the Village of Incorporated
Chatterboxes—manifested in the very two companies that had rejected his
type one services.

Along the way, when he and another friend were digging the stream, their
inspired group grew to 55 individuals, and the elders of other villages
threw them a few bones, $250,000 at first, then $8 million, and
eventually $50 million by Sequoia Capital once the stream was going to
obviously be successful.

Three hours before the very moment that I’m writing this, CNN announced
that this type two worker’s stream was “purchased by Facebook for $19
billion”—that’s billion with a “B.” (Editor’s Note: Facebook purchased
WhatsApp in February 2014.)

And Brian Acton, after five years of “digging a revenue stream” for
Facebook’s business, is now a capital owner in Facebook—a place where he
originally applied for a job and got denied.

His timestamped tweets from 2009 before he started “digging”:

> Got denied by Twitter HQ. That’s ok. Would have been a long commute.
>
> — Brian Acton (@brianacton) [May 23,
> 2009](https://twitter.com/brianacton/status/1895942068)

> Facebook turned me down. It was a great opportunity to connect with
> some fantastic people. Looking forward to life’s next adventure.
>
> — Brian Acton (@brianacton) [August 3,
> 2009](https://twitter.com/brianacton/status/3109544383)

Do you think his 55 employees will need to negotiate for $500,000
salaries at Facebook?

Or do you think Facebook will force larger salaries and vesting capital
upon them lest they decide to get the heck out of the village as soon as
their checks clear?

The type two worker does not compare or negotiate salary, because he is
not selling a service to the village (corporation). He is selling
overlooked wealth. The village essentially has no choice but to
compensate him in accordance with the value of the wealth he brings to
the table. The wealth in his hand can be traded to make both sides of
the deal better off. (Watch the uptick in Facebook’s shares)

The question is not whether there will be a deal. It’s whether this
particular village is sitting at the other side of the table when that
deal happens. And when it’s water for the village, the extra zeroes
following the dollar sign are considered a negligible necessity.

*You can follow Quora on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/Quora),
[Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/quora), and
[Google+](https://plus.google.com/111127313006403749982/posts).*

More from Quora:

[What unique benefits do start-ups offer their new
employees?](http://www.quora.com/Startups/What-unique-benefits-do-start-ups-offer-their-new-employees)

[What are the characteristics of a bad software
engineer?](http://www.quora.com/Software-Engineering/What-are-the-characteristics-of-a-bad-software-engineer)

[Is gender pay gap a
myth?](http://www.quora.com/Gender-Differences/Is-gender-pay-gap-a-myth)



