Cambodia’s Hun Sen Refuses to Allow Ministers to Appear for Questioning
=======================================================================

![In these undated file photos, Hun Sen ( right ) and Sam Rainsy speak
to reporters after a meeting at the National
Assembly.](http://www.rfa.org/english/news/cambodia/cambodias-hun-sen-refuses-02012017142655.html/sam-rainsy-and-hun-sen.jpg/image "In these undated file photos, Hun Sen ( right ) and Sam Rainsy speak to reporters after a meeting at the National Assembly.")
In these undated file photos, Hun Sen ( right ) and Sam Rainsy speak to
reporters after a meeting at the National Assembly.
RFA/Yeang Socheametta

By refusing to make some of his cabinet available for questioning by the
National Assembly, Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen is continuing his
attempts to put his opposition on the sidelines.

In a Tuesday interview Hun Sen told the pro-government media outlet
Fresh News that he is refusing to allow three of his ministers to
respond to questioning in the National Assembly.

Members of the opposition Cambodia National Rescue Party (CNRP) wanted
to grill Minister of National Defense Tea Banh, Minister of Agriculture
Veng Sakhon, and Minister of Labor and Vocational Training Ith Sam Heng
on a range of issues.

Independent political analyst Lao Mong Hay told RFA’s Khmer Service that
Hun Sen’s decision runs contrary to the National Assembly’s rules and
the country’s constitution.

“He \[Hun Sen\] violates the constitution and the internal rules of the
National Assembly,” Lao Mong Hay said. “The internal rules say questions
and answers shall occur every Thursday.”

While opposition lawmakers have the right to question the ministers, the
ministers also have protections, Lao Mong Hay explained.

“There are also conditions for the questions to be raised,” he said.
“For example, it is forbidden to ask questions related to cases being
processed by the court.”

**Military promotions, the border and labor issues**

Those protections could stifle some questions, but opposition lawmakers
could still put the ministers on the spot as the ongoing controversy
over the demarcation of the border with Vietnam, a lack of jobs, and the
recent promotion of three soldiers who pled guilty to beating a pair of
opposition lawmakers could be fair game.

CNRP Chief Whip Son Chhay told RFA he wants to see a written letter from
Hun Sen explaining why the ministers cannot appear before the National
Assembly.

“We want to question them about reform,” he said.

“Does the ministry of national defense have a proper mechanism to defend
the territory; for promotions in rank, et cetera?” he added. “Because
lately we have noticed that some guys without the proper background have
been promoted too quickly. We just want to know the procedures.”

On May 27, 2016 soldiers Mao Hoeun, Sot Vanny, and Chay Sarith pled
guilty to assaulting CNRP lawmakers Kong Saphea and Nhay Chamroeun.

All three men were members of Hun Sen’s bodyguard unit, an elite
operation within the Cambodian armed forces that functions as a kind of
Praetorian Guard for Asia’s longest-serving national leader.

Though the three pled guilty to the attack, they served only a year of
their four-year sentence in prison.

Soon after they were released in November, the men were promoted,
although it’s unclear whether they still remain in the bodyguard unit.

Chay Sarith was promoted from colonel to brigadier general by a royal
decree signed by King Norodom Sihamoni dated Nov. 22. Sot Vanny and Mao
Hoeun were promoted from lieutenant colonel to full colonel on Nov. 17.

The border issue has been a potent political issue as opposition
lawmakers have often accused Hun Sen of ceding land to neighboring
Vietnam and of having an uncomfortably cozy relationship with Hanoi.

Labor issues have also bedeviled Cambodia for years, and CNRP lawmakers
want to probe the exploitation of Cambodians working overseas and issues
involving the issuance of passports and visas for workers.

**‘These threats show the panic of Hun Sen’**

Hun Sen’s decision to keep his ministers from testifying comes after he
launched a new attack on the opposition.

In a Tuesday speech before the National Assembly, Hun Sen pushed for
legislation that would bar his chief political rival from heading a
political party and threatened to seize and auction off the CNRP’s
headquarters.

Those threats came after the National Assembly stripped CNRP deputy
leader Kem Sokha of his minority leader title. Hun Sen’s Cambodian
People’s Party (CPP) holds a majority in the National Assembly.

“Threatening to have CNRP headquarters seized looks like an attempt to
eliminate the party by destroying the CNRP leadership and foundation,”
said independent analyst Meas Ny. “If it happened as per Mr. Hun Sen’s
speech, it would be a big danger for the CNRP.”

Via his Facebook page, CNRP leader Sam Rainsy described Hun Sen’s latest
actions as those of a man desperate to hold on to power.

“These threats show the panic of Hun Sen as his certain defeat in the
communal elections in June 2017 and the legislative elections of July
2018 draw closer,” Rainsy wrote in his post. “He no longer has any
appeal to the electorate, so he personally hounds me, as I am the symbol
of resistance to his autocratic and corrupt power.”

In September, Sam Rainsy was found guilty of defamation for claiming
that Prime Minister Hun Sen’s social medial team had bought “likes” on
Facebook from “click farms” abroad to increase the appearance of
support.

And in December, he was sentenced to five years in prison in absentia
for posting what authorities said was a fake government pledge to
dissolve the Southeast Asian country's border with Vietnam.

Sam Rainsy has been living in France since 2015 to avoid arrest in a
defamation case brought by former Foreign Minister Hor Namhong in 2008.

Despite what appears to be a vendetta against him, Sam Rainsy said that
he remains confident he will prevail in the end.

“Hun Sen has tried for years to misuse the courts to exclude me from
politics and to suppress or divide the CNRP, so in that sense there is
nothing new,” he wrote in the post.

“He has failed because the CNRP remains a united force that will defeat
him in the 2017 and 2018 elections.”

***Reported by Zakariya Tin and Sarada Taing for RFA's Khmer Service.
Translated by Sovannarith Keo. Written in English by Brooks Boliek.***  
****



