HKU vice-chancellor Peter Mathieson denies political pressure behind resignation
================================================================================

He maintains he enjoyed the problems that came with the job but felt he
had to take Edinburgh offer when the opportunity arose

PUBLISHED : Friday, 03 February, 2017, 6:01pm

UPDATED : Friday, 03 February, 2017, 11:34pm

A day after University of Hong Kong vice-chancellor Peter Mathieson
[shocked the city with his
resignation](http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/education-community/article/2067524/university-hong-kong-chief-peter-mathieson),
he rejected speculation that he was quitting because of political
pressure.

Mathieson said his job at HKU was unfinished, but he could not miss the
opportunity to lead the prestigious University of Edinburgh, based in
his father’s Scottish home town.

He also confirmed that he would be taking “a substantial pay cut” with
the new offer, but declined to reveal the amount. Mathieson earns an
estimated HK$5.8 million a year at HKU.

[HKU chief’s resignation slammed as ‘unacceptable’ and premature amid
concerns over institute’s
future](http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/education-community/article/2067785/hku-chiefs-resignation-unacceptable-former)

While the head of Hong Kong’s oldest university is due to step down next
January, two years before his contract expires, his counterparts at
Chinese University, Lingnan University, Polytechnic University and
Education University will all see their contracts expire next year.

Mathieson’s premature departure has drawn suspicion among some staff and
members of HKU’s governing council, who believe he was sidelined by
council chairman Arthur Li Kwok-cheung, a former education minister
often accused of a high-handed management style.

“Obviously Hong Kong is a very politically complicated place, and this
job has been a very politically complicated job,” Mathieson said at a
press conference on Friday. “I’ve enjoyed that as a trade-off for the
job ... That’s not something that has made me feel that I can’t cope
with it.”

He said he had held a “good discussion” with Li on Wednesday, when he
informed him of his intention to resign, during which they did not
discuss whether he should stay.

[A baptism by fire: HKU vice-chancellor Peter Mathieson’s term marked by
political storms and mass
protests](http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/education-community/article/2067577/baptism-fire-hku-vice-chancellor-peter-mathiesons)

Mathieson rejected HKU student union leader Althea Suen Hiu-lam’s
accusation of irresponsibility, denying that he had abandoned HKU’s
students and staff. He said the university’s “superb” management team
would continue its work, but he apologised for disappointing them by
quitting.

“I don’t like the idea of leaving before the job is finished, and I
don’t feel the job is finished here,” he said. “But I had to take into
account the fact that this opportunity is available now ... and I had to
make up my mind whether or not to take it.”

He said it had taken him months to come to the decision, during which he
discussed the matter with his family and made two visits before and
after Christmas to Edinburgh. He took leave from HKU and all expenses
were paid by the University of Edinburgh, he added.

“When I walk around the streets of Edinburgh, I think of father and I
think that my father would have been proud to see his son as the
principal of the University of Edinburgh,” he said.

Mathieson will receive a substantially lower annual salary package of
£301,000 (HK$3 million) at Edinburgh.

“Money is not the most important thing to me in the world,” he said.
“The fact that there is a pay cut is irrelevant.”

The former dean of the University of Bristol’s medicine and dentistry
faculty took the helm at HKU in April 2014, five months before the
outbreak of the 79-day pro-democracy Occupy protests, which were led by
students.



