Hong Kong losing talent because of bickering and grandstanding
==============================================================

The good and the smart are leaving the city in droves thanks to bad
policymaking, divisiveness and constant politicising

PUBLISHED : Saturday, 04 February, 2017, 1:31am

UPDATED : Saturday, 04 February, 2017, 1:31am

In today’s no-can-do Hong Kong, bickering and grandstanding is the norm.
Is it any wonder that good and smart people are leaving in droves? Soon
we will be left with incompetent sycophants and rabble-rousing windbags
in positions of power and influence.

News reports on the resignation of University of Hong Kong chief Peter
Mathieson have described it as a shock and a surprise. But is it really?

The vice-chancellor once called it the best job in the world; it looks
more like one of the worst. Caught between the student Red Guards on
campus and the imperious and disruptive Arthur Li Kwok-cheung as council
chairman, it must be a total nightmare.

Who wouldn’t quit for the literally greener and more peaceful pasture of
the University of Edinburgh, Scotland, over the daily urban jungle
warfare in Hong Kong?

Already, the usual suspects are speculating why Mathieson quit two years
ahead of his contract’s expiry. The pan-democrats claim the
pro-government management headed by Li is to blame. Others say it’s the
highly politicised and divisive student body led by a few overly
radicalised scholars. They are probably both right. Mathieson says he is
quitting for “personal reasons”, the classic non-explanation when
someone of importance prematurely quits his or her job in Hong Kong.

[A baptism by fire: HKU vice-chancellor Peter Mathieson’s term marked by
political storms and mass
protests](https://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/education-community/article/2067577/baptism-fire-hku-vice-chancellor-peter-mathiesons)

His resignation follows a pattern of eminent outsiders who failed to
lead such public bodies because of constant infighting. West Kowloon
Cultural District Authority CEO Michael Lynch quit in 2015 citing – you
guessed it – “personal reasons”. His predecessor Graham Sheffield just
bought a plane ticket and skipped town five months into his job. I am
not condoning Sheffield’s behaviour, but can kind of understand it. The
arts hub is a classic basket case of a public body led astray by bad
government policymaking and constant politicising by the opposition.

HKU will soon have to launch a global search for a replacement. It
already has two unfilled senior posts – those of the provost and the
vice-president for institutional development.

It’s telling that it will have so many senior vacancies. As the city’s
oldest and most prestigious university, you would think people would be
fighting over each other for a shot at the top.

The university needs more than a scholar or manager, but a real
politician and diplomat, to lead it. Good luck finding such a person.



