China’s central bank starts Year of the Rooster with ‘groundbreaking’ broad rise in money market rates
======================================================================================================

Move sends clear signal that Beijing is tightening its monetary policy
in the face of pressures that are threatening to weaken the yuan

PUBLISHED : Friday, 03 February, 2017, 6:13pm

UPDATED : Friday, 03 February, 2017, 11:20pm

China’s central bank has surprisingly raised money market rates across
the board on the first working day in the Year of the Rooster – sending
a clear signal that Beijing is tightening its monetary policy in the
face of pressures threatening to weaken the yuan.

In its open market operation on Friday, the seven-day repo rate, a major
interest rate between the central bank and commercial banks in the
interbank market, was increased to 2.35 per cent from the 2.25 per cent
rate before the start of the Lunar New Year holiday; the 14-day and
28-day repo rates were also increased by 0.1 percentage points.

![](http://www.scmp.com/sites/default/files/styles/660x385/public/images/methode/2017/02/03/1c794cb6-e9ea-11e6-925a-a992a025ddf7_660x385.JPG?itok=cKRZNK1G "China’s central bank, the People’s Bank of China, was forced to take counter measures after mainland banks lent money too aggressively in January. Photo: Reuters")

China’s central bank, the People’s Bank of China, was forced to take
counter measures after mainland banks lent money too aggressively in
January. Photo: Reuters

A repo rate is the discounted rate at which a central bank repurchases
government securities from commercial banks.
The People’s Bank of China said in a separate statement that it had
raised the rates of standing lending facility (SLF) loans on Friday. The
overnight SLF rate has been raised to 3.1 per cent from 2.75 per cent in
January. Rates for seven-day and one-month SLF loans have also been
increased.

Friday’s money market rate increase was unusual because money market
rates tended to fall following past Lunar New Year holidays.

[China’s central bank ‘playing dangerous game’ to prop up
yuan](http://www.scmp.com/news/china/economy/article/2064431/chinas-central-bank-playing-dangerous-game-prop-yuan)

Such increases on financial institutions are similar to an interest rate
rise because they will eventually be passed on downstream to corporate
and household sectors.

Chinese banks lent money too aggressively in January, forcing the PBOC
to take counter measures such as introducing a higher money market rate
level to cool off the lending frenzy.

“It is a policy response to the robust January credit rise and reflects
the central government’s requirement of prudent and neutral monetary
policy and asset bubble prevention,” Lu Zhengwei, the chief economist at
Industrial Bank, wrote in a note on the rate increase.

Zhang Xiaohui, an assistant governor at the central bank, wrote in an
article in the latest issue of *China Finance* magazine that PBOC would
be “more neutral and more prudent” in monetary policy in 2017.

The central bank would seek a balance between multiple policy
objectives, namely “stabilising economic growth, improving economic
structure, preventing asset bubbles and managing financial risks”, Zhang
said.

[China’s central bank turns tiger mum as it faces tough balancing act
over monetary
policy](http://www.scmp.com/news/china/economy/article/2065048/chinas-central-bank-turns-tiger-mum-it-faces-tough-balancing-act)

China is expected to maintain an economic growth target of about 6.5 per
cent this year after it secured a 6.7 per cent increase of gross
domestic product on property and infrastructure construction boost and
credit loosening last year.

As the US Federal Reserve is expected to increase interest rate further,
China’s central bank is on high alert.

“The change \[on Friday\] is groundbreaking,” wrote Raymond Yeung, chief
China economist at ANZ.

“\[The\] PBOC will adopt a flexible interest rate regime in 2017... and
will change the onshore rates more frequently.”

[China’s central bank raises obscure rate to send clear
message](http://www.scmp.com/news/china/economy/article/2039958/chinas-central-bank-hikes-obscure-rate-send-clear-message)

The rate rise will accelerate financial deleveraging, a policy goal
pursued by the Chinese government since August 2016.

At the Central Economic Work Conference in December, Beijing decided to
make financial risk and asset bubble prevention a higher priority as the
top leadership will be reshuffled at the end of this year.



