### [The Opinion Pages](https://www.nytimes.com/pages/opinion/index.html) | Editorial

Wanted: One Republican With Integrity, to Defeat Betsy DeVos
============================================================

By [THE EDITORIAL
BOARD](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/opinion/editorialboard.html)FEB.
2, 2017

This country needs a few good Republicans — one more would do — to
rescue it from Betsy DeVos, one of President Trump’s worst cabinet
choices and his pick to run the Department of Education.

The vote to confirm Ms. DeVos is expected as soon as Monday, and the
Republican senators Lisa Murkowski of Alaska and Susan Collins of Maine
[now say they’ll vote
against](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/01/us/politics/trump-cabinet-nominations-senate.html)her,
citing hundreds of calls they’ve received from furious voters. The
result would be a tie that Vice President Mike Pence would break in Ms.
DeVos’s favor. The extra Republican vote could come from one of several
independent-minded senators; one candidate is Lamar Alexander, an expert
on public schools who actually owes the country a good turn because of
his failure as chairman of the committee vetting Ms. DeVos to question
her closely and to give more time to her critics.

There are few more telling examples of Mr. Trump’s disdain for the
federal government’s critical role in lifting up America’s
schoolchildren than his choice of Ms. DeVos. She has spent years
funneling her inherited fortune into a campaign to replace the nation’s
traditional public schools with federally funded charter schools,
regardless of the latter’s performance, and supporting vouchers, which
help families send children to private or parochial schools and drain
funds from public schools that need more, not less, support.

Mr. Alexander didn’t give senators much time to question Ms. DeVos, but
it was sufficient to reveal her near-total unfamiliarity with public
education law, standards and even problems. A conservative ideologue,
she fell back on most policy questions to an assertion that states
should make their own rules, even on settled matters of federal law,
like access for handicapped children.

She robotically refused to answer whether she would hold charter schools
and other public schools equally accountable. She drew national ridicule
when she rejected the notion of gun-free zones around schools, saying
guns might come in handy for shooting “potential grizzlies” — an answer
delivered to Senator Chris Murphy of Connecticut, where the Sandy Hook
shooting occurred.

Betsy DeVos’s nomination is not about making public education more
effective, or helping publicly schooled children succeed; it’s about
blowing up the system without a clue as to what comes next. Mr.
Alexander was secretary of education himself, from 1991 to 1993, and he
ran for president twice, speaking out against the influence of money in
politics. And while he went way easy on Ms. DeVos in the hearings, he
surely knows better than to place her in a job of such importance to the
country’s future.

There are other bad cabinet nominees with credentials as dubious as Ms.
DeVos’s whose possible ascension to high office should terrify any
thoughtful Republican. Among those for whom final votes have yet to be
held are Scott Pruitt, Tom Price and Steven Mnuchin, Mr. Trump’s picks
for the Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of Health and
Human Services, and the Treasury. Mr. Pruitt, who as Oklahoma attorney
general repeatedly sued the agency he would now lead, showed his
contempt for the Senate [by repeatedly telling
senators](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/02/us/politics/scott-pruitt-epa-senate.html)
to go get the answers they wanted themselves, by filing records requests
with the state of Oklahoma. Mr. Price has shown incredibly poor judgment
by [investing in health care
stocks](https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/18/opinion/tom-prices-dubious-trades-in-health-care-stocks.html)
while writing and promoting legislation that would benefit those
investments. Mr. Mnuchin, a Trump fund-raiser and financier, failed to
disclose $100 million in personal assets as well as his role in an
investment fund registered to an offshore tax haven.

The Senate’s constitutional duty to “advise and consent” on presidential
nominations was intended by the founders to counter the wrong-headed
populist impulses of the House. Voters should remind Republican senators
that if they surrender to Mr. Trump on appointees so clearly unfit, they
will be relinquishing a historic obligation and tarnishing themselves.

*Follow The New York Times Opinion section on
[Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/nytopinion) and [Twitter
(@NYTopinion)](http://twitter.com/NYTOpinion), and sign up for
the[Opinion Today
newsletter](http://www.nytimes.com/newsletters/opiniontoday/).  
*

A version of this editorial appears in print on February 3, 2017, on
Page A26 of the New York edition with the headline: Needed: 1 More No
Vote on Ms. DeVos. [Today's
Paper](http://www.nytimes.com/pages/todayspaper/index.html)|[Subscribe](http://www.nytimes.com/subscriptions/Multiproduct/lp839RF.html?campaignId=48JQY)

[](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSfLW30xgZodF1qRAg80oWEGuDpW-1HHaL0g42G3SmvB2f4lCw/viewform?entry.8537735=https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/02/opinion/wanted-one-republican-with-integrity-to-defeat-betsy-devos.html)

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. **Tell us what you
think.**

