### [Personal Tech](https://www.nytimes.com/pages/technology/personaltech/index.html)

When a Smartphone’s Camera Loses Its Focus
==========================================

[Tech Tip](https://www.nytimes.com/column/tech-tip)

By [J. D. BIERSDORFER](https://www.nytimes.com/by/j-d-biersdorfer) FEB.
1, 2017

**Q***. My phone’s camera has taken blurry photos since I dropped it. Is
there a way to repair the camera, or do I need to get a new phone?*

**A.** A smartphone’s camera is just one of its many internal
components, and it can probably be
[replaced](http://iresq.com/apple-repair-news/fix-smartphone-camera/)
for much less money and effort than it would take to buy and set up a
new phone. It could cost perhaps $50 or $60, depending on the phone
model and repair shop. (The phone’s casing will be opened so the new
camera unit can be installed. Before you have it serviced, back up
everything to the cloud or your computer so your data is safe.)

First, you may want to rule out any software or physical issues with the
phone and its camera. Make sure that the lens is not dirty and that the
latest app and system updates have been installed. Reset the camera
app’s settings if you have not already done so. Try another camera app
to make sure the problem does not lie in the software, and test the
camera in a variety of situations. The phone’s manufacturer may even
have suggestions for specific issues or be aware of defective hardware,
like
[Apple](http://www.nytimes.com/topic/company/apple-incorporated?inline=nyt-org)’s
[iSight Camera Replacement Program for iPhone 6
Plus](https://www.apple.com/support/iphone6plus-isightcamera/).

If you have concluded the camera is indeed damaged, seeking out a repair
shop is the next step. A quick web search should turn up the smartphone
repair shops in your area, along with mail-in service centers, but read
the professional and customer reviews of any place under consideration.
Retail chains like [Best
Buy](https://www.bestbuy.com/site/geek-squad/cell-phone-services/pcmcat286500050002.c?id=pcmcat286500050002),
[Staples](http://m.staples.com/sbd/cre/tech-services/get-help-now/smartphone-tablet-repair/)
and [Office
Depot](https://www.officedepot.com/a/content/customer-service/samedayrepair/)
also offer repair services, as do [Apple
stores](https://www.apple.com/retail/geniusbar/).

Repair options can include sending the phone to a service depot for
several days, or having a technician fix it on the spot. If you have an
extended warranty like Apple’s
[AppleCare](http://www.apple.com/support/products/iphone.html), repairs
may be free or less expensive than for out-of-warranty iPhones. The plan
has a $99 [iPhone Express Replacement
Service](https://support.apple.com/iphone/repair/service/express-replacement)
benefit for damaged devices.

If you do not want to part with your phone during the repair period —
and do not mind prying open the device — you might be able to replace
the broken camera yourself. The [iFixit repair-guide
site](https://www.ifixit.com/) has a number of free tutorials showing
[how to install a new
camera](https://www.ifixit.com/Search?query=smartphone+camera) in
several smartphone models, and it sells the tools and parts, too.

**Personal Tech invites questions about computer-based technology to**
[**techtip@nytimes.com**](mailto:techtip@nytimes.com)**. This column
will answer questions of general interest, but letters cannot be
answered individually.**

[](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSfLW30xgZodF1qRAg80oWEGuDpW-1HHaL0g42G3SmvB2f4lCw/viewform?entry.8537735=https://www.nytimes.com/2017/02/01/technology/personaltech/when-a-smartphones-camera-loses-its-focus.html)

We’re interested in your feedback on this page. **Tell us what you
think.**

