Threat to Expel U.N. Human Rights Office Riles Cambodia
=======================================================

![Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen (L) shakes hands with new Foreign
Minister Prak Sokhon (R) during a handover ceremony at the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs in Phnom Penh, April 5,
2016.](http://www.rfa.org/english/news/cambodia/threat-to-give-the-boot-11282016154303.html/prak-and-hun-sen.jpg/image "Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen (L) shakes hands with new Foreign Minister Prak Sokhon (R) during a handover ceremony at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Phnom Penh, April 5, 2016.")
Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen (L) shakes hands with new Foreign
Minister Prak Sokhon (R) during a handover ceremony at the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs in Phnom Penh, April 5, 2016.
AFP

Kicking the U.N. Office of the High Commissioner on Human Rights out of
Cambodia is raising worries among the country’s citizens that they will
have no place to turn if the rights watchdog no longer has a place in
the country.

“Cambodia will be a more authoritarian country without the U.N. office,”
a rickshaw driver named Chhun Oeun told RFA’s Khmer Service. “Even now,
with the U.N. office here, several human rights activists have been
arrested, beaten, and jailed. I cannot imagine how much worse the
situation will be if there is no such office.”

Am Sam Ath, a technical coordinator for human rights group Licadho, told
RFA that closing the Office of the High Commissioner on Human Rights
(OHCHR) in Cambodia would be a loss for the entire nation as it will
lose foreign aid and international respect.

“Cambodia will be deprived of its foreign aid due to its action,” he
said. “There might be fewer reports on human right abuses if the U.N.
office is no longer present, but that doesn’t do any good to the
government’s overall image.”

Song Sreyleap, a Boeung Kak land activist, told RFA the Cambodian
government is trying to avoid its responsibilities to its people.

“If the government does not want the U.N.’s intervention into Cambodia’s
internal affairs, why has it failed to take good care of its own people?
 Why has it not done anything to improve the human rights situation? Why
has it not stopped the suppression of freedom of expression and freedom
of assembly? Why has it not stopped evicting people from their homes?”
she said.

Some 3,500 families were evicted from the land surrounding Boeung Kak
lake in Phnom Penh, which was filled with sand to make way for a
development project with close ties to Hun Sen and the ruling Cambodian
People’s Party (CPP).

Sar Sorn, a representative of Borei Keila community, told RFA the
attempt by Hun Sen’s government to kick out the U.N. was a transparent
attempt to hide his activities.

“The government is afraid to face the truth about its abuses of human
rights, and that’s why it wants to close down the U.N. office,” she
said. “If the government is truly accountable for its actions as it
claims it is, then it shouldn’t be afraid to let the U.N. office
continue its mandate. Its threat to close the office reflects the regime
of a dictator.”

About 300 families in Borei Keila were forcibly evicted from their homes
in 2012 to make way for development by the politically-connected
construction company Phanimex.

Trader Sim Thida told RFA that she fears a return to the dark days of
the Khmer Rouge.

“Cambodia will be reduced to a regime like the Khmer Rouge where people
were totally controlled and deprived of their rights and freedom,” she
said. “Cambodia will lose a check and balance if there is no U.N.
office.”

**'Arrogant and disrespectful behavior'**

Cambodia’s Foreign Minister Prak Sokhon accused the U.N. Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), of “arrogant and
disrespectful behavior toward the sovereignty of Cambodia,” and
threatened to end the country’s cooperation with the office unless it
agrees to quit "meddling" in the nation’s internal affairs.

“Despite the \[Royal Government of Cambodia’s\] efforts to enhance the
smooth, constructive, and effective cooperation based on mutual respect,
the OHCHR has furthermore been stepping up its interference in internal
affairs of Cambodia,” he wrote in a Nov. 22 letter to OHCHR leader Zeid
Ra’ad al-Hussein.

While the memorandum of understanding that allows the OHCHR to operate
in Cambodia lapsed last year, the office has continued to function
without it.

According to Prak Sokhon’s letter, that could end at the end of 2016 if
the OHCHR refuses to agree to operate “on the basis of the principle of
respect for sovereignty and non-interference in Cambodia’s internal
affairs.”

Raivna Shamdasani, a spokeswoman for the U.N. High Commissioner for
Human Rights, said yesterday that discussions with the government on the
new agreement were continuing, the *Khmer Times* reported.  

“The presence of OHCHR in any country depends on the agreement of the
host country, and we are looking forward to continuing to discuss with
the government the continuing presence of OHCHR in the country,” she
said, according to local media reports.  

**Sovereignty and Sam Rainsy**

Cambodia’s government has bristled over comments made earlier this month
by the OHCHR’s country representative Wan-Hea Lee, who told local media
that an Interior Ministry directive barring Cambodia National Rescue
Party (CNRP) leader Sam Rainsy from entering the country was a likely
rights violation.

“No elements of the decision to block the entry of Mr. Sam Rainsy into
Cambodia have been brought to light that would allow anyone to assess
its reasonableness, which renders the decision unjustified and
arbitrary,” Lee wrote in an email to *The Cambodia Daily.*

In October, the Cambodian government ordered police, immigration, and
aviation authorities to "use all ways and means" to prevent opposition
leader Sam Rainsy from returning from exile, as he has pledged to do
before elections in 2017 and 2018.

The opposition leader has been abroad for a year to avoid a two-year
prison sentence handed down in a defamation case. It is not the only
conviction handed down by the courts.

In the latest case, the Phnom Penh Municipal Court found the opposition
leader guilty of defamation on Nov. 8 for claiming that Prime Minister
Hun Sen’s social medial team bought “likes” on Facebook from “click
farms” abroad to increase his support.

At the time of his latest conviction, the opposition leader said he
could never win in the Cambodian courts because they are “puppets of the
government.”

**ADHOC and NEC officialskept in jail**

Meanwhile, the Cambodian appellate court on Monday refused to release
four workers for the human rights organization ADHOC and a National
Election Commission member who are facing charges in connection with the
government’s wide-ranging probe into deputy opposition leader Kem
Sokha’s alleged affair with a young hairdresser.

The Appeals Court upheld the Phnom Penh Municipal Court’s decision to
keep ADHOC’s Ny Sokha, Yi Soksan, Nay Vanda, and Lim Mony, and the NEC’s
Ny Chakrya in jail for up to six more months as the court collects more
evidence in the cases, which are widely seen as politically motivated.

Ny Chakrya and the ADHOC workers face charges of bribery or attempted
bribery for allegedly attempting to pay hairdresser Khom Chandaraty
money to keep quiet about her alleged relationship with Kem Sokha.

“The appeals court judge indicated that the court has upheld the
investigative judge’s decision on the provisional detention as it is a
criminal case and the investigation is not yet complete,” Kea Sophal, an
attorney for the ADHOC workers told RFA, saying the legal team has yet
to decide what to do next.

***Reported by Sideth Cheu and Samnang Rann for RFA's Khmer Service.
Translated by Nareth Muong. Written in English by Brooks Boliek.***



