Must Read Books for Beginners on Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence
=============================================================================

Introduction
------------

Machine Learning has granted incredible power to humans. The power to
run tasks in automated manner, the power to make our lives
comfrotable, the power to improve things continuously by studying
decisions at large sacle . And the power to create species who think
better than humans.

Don’t believe me? Read what Google’s CEO Mr. Sundar Pichai had to say
last week:

> ‘Machine learning is a core, transformative way by which we’re
> rethinking everything we’re doing,’ Pichai said. ‘We’re thoughtfully
> applying it across all our products, be it search, ads, YouTube, or
> Play. We’re in the early days, but you’ll see us in a systematic way
> think about how we can apply machine learning to all these areas.’
>
> – Sundar Pichai, CEO, Google

Those who know of these advancements, are keen to master this concept,
including me. When I started with this mission, I found various form of
digitized study material. They seemed promising, comprehensive, yet
lacked a perspective. My curiosity didn’t let me rest for long. I
resorted to Books.

Don’t you read books? Oh! I see, you don’t get time. Right? Must be a
busy man, perhaps!

When Elon Musk, the busiest man of planet right now, was asked about his
secret of success, he replied, ‘I used to read books. A LOT’. Later,
Kimbal Musk, Elon’s brother said, ‘He would even complete two books in a
day’.

The phenomenon of Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence,
is thoroughly covered in the books mentioned below.

In this article, I’ve listed the best books on Machine Learning and
Artificial Intelligence. Books are in no order. The motive of this
article is not to promote any particular book, but you make you aware of
a world which exists beyond video tutorials, blogs and podcasts.

[![Must read books on machine learning and artificial
intelligence](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/garphics-3-1.jpg)](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/garphics-3-1.jpg)

Machine Learning
----------------

### [Programming Collective Intelligence](http://amzn.to/2jcT9W2)

[![1](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/17.png)](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/17.png)

Programming Collective Intelligence, PCI as it is popularly known, is
one of the best books to start learning machine learning. If there is
one book to choose on machine learning – it is this one. I haven’t met a
data scientist yet who has read this book and does not recommend to keep
it on your bookshelf. A lot of them have re-read this book multiple
times.

The book was written long before data science and machine learning
acquired the cult status they have today – but the topics and chapters
are entirely relevant even today! Some of the topics covered in the book
are collaborative filtering techniques, search engine features, Bayesian
filtering and Support vector machines.*If you don’t have a copy of this
book – order it as soon as you finish reading this article!*The book
uses Python to deliver machine learning in a fascinating manner.

### [Machine Learning for Hackers](http://amzn.to/2j7eH2k)

[![2](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/2.png)](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/2.png)

This book is written by Drew Conway and John Myles White. It is majorly
based on data analysis in R. This books is best suited for beginners
having basic knowledge on R. It further covers the use of advanced R in
data wrangling. It has interesting case studies which will help you to
understand the importance of using machine learning algorithms.

### [Machine Learning by Tom M Mitchell](http://amzn.to/2idWtvP)

[![3](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/3.png)](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/3.png)

After you’ve read the above books, you are good to dive into machine
learning. This is a great introductory book on machine learning.
It provides a nice overview of ml theorems with pseudocode summaries of
their algorithms. Apart from case studies, Tom has used basic examples
to help you understand these algorithms easily.

Free PDF Link:
[Download](http://personal.disco.unimib.it/Vanneschi/McGrawHill_-_Machine_Learning_-Tom_Mitchell.pdf)

### [The Elements of Statistical Learning](http://amzn.to/2jd6L3L)

[![4](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/4.png)](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/4.png)

This book is written by Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, Jerome
Friedman. This book aptly explains the machine learning algorithms
mathematically from a statistical perspective. It provides a powerful
world created by statistics and machine learning. This books lays
emphasis on mathematical derivations to define the underlying logic
behind an algorithm. This book demands a rudimentary understanding of
linear algebra.

Free PDF Link:
[Download](http://www-stat.stanford.edu/~tibs/ElemStatLearn/printings/ESLII_print10.pdf)

### [Learning from Data](http://amzn.to/2iE7M3H)

[![5](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/5.png)](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/5.png)

This book is written by Yaser Abu Mostafa, Malik Magdon-Ismail and
Hsuan-Tien Lin. This book provides a perfect introduction to machine
learning. This book prepares you to understand complex areas of machine
learning. Yaser has provided ‘to the point’ explanations instead of
lengthy and go-around explanations. If you choose this book, I’d suggest
you to refer to online
[tutorials](https://work.caltech.edu/telecourse.html) of Yaser Abu
Mostafa as well. They’re awesome.

Free PDF Link:
[Download](http://www.amlbook.com/support.html#_echapters)

### [Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning](http://amzn.to/2idUhVj)

[![6](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/6.png)](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/6.png)

This book is written by Christopher M Bishop. This book serves as a
excellent reference for students keen to understand the use of
statistical techniques in machine learning and pattern recognition. This
books assumes the knowledge of linear algebra and multivariate calculus.
It provides a comprehensive introduction to statistical pattern
recognition techniques using practice exercises.

Free PDF Link:
[Download](http://www.rmki.kfki.hu/~banmi/elte/Bishop%20-%20Pattern%20Recognition%20and%20Machine%20Learning.pdf)

Artificial Intelligence
-----------------------

### [Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach](http://amzn.to/2jd5KZc)

![11](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/11-235x300.png)Who
else might be the best coach to learn AI than Peter Norvig? You have to
take a course from Norvig to understand his style of teaching. But once
you do, you will long for it!

This book is written by Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig. It is best
suited for people new to A.I. More than just providing an overview of
artificial intelligence, this book thoroughly covers subjects from
search algorithms, reducing problems to search problems, working with
logic, planning, and more advanced topics in AI such as reasoning with
partial observability, machine learning and language processing. Make it
the first book on A.I in your book shelf.

Free PDF Link:
[Download](http://www.cin.ufpe.br/~tfl2/artificial-intelligence-modern-approach.9780131038059.25368.pdf)

### [Artificial Intelligence for Humans](http://amzn.to/2ie0d0k)

![12](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/12-234x300.png)

This book is written by Jeff Heaton. It teaches basic artificial
intelligence algorithms such as dimensionality, distance metrics,
clustering, error calculation, hill climbing, Nelder Mead, and linear
regression. It explains these algorithms using interesting examples and
cases. Needless to say, this book requires good commands over
mathematics. Otherwise, you’ll have tough time deciphering the
equations.

### [Paradigm of Artificial Intelligence Programming](http://amzn.to/2jd8OEL)

![13](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/13-246x300.png)

Another one by Peter Norvig!

This book teaches advanced common lisp techniques to build major A.I
systems. It delves deep into the practical aspects of A.I and teaches
its readers the method to build and debug robust practical programs. It
also demonstrates superior programming style and essential AI concepts.
I’d recommend reading this book, if you are serious about a career in
A.I specially.

### [Artificial Intelligence: A New Synthesis](http://amzn.to/2ie0znZ)

[![14](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/14-201x300.png)](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/14.png)

This book is written by Nils J Nilsson. After reading the above 3 books,
you’d like something which could challenge your mind. Here’s what you
are looking for. This books covers topics such as Neural networks,
genetic programming, computer vision, heuristic search, knowledge
representation and reasoning, Bayes networks and explains them with
great ease. I wouldn’t recommend this book for a beginner. However, it’s
a must read for advanced level user.

### [The Emotion Machine: Commonsense Thinking, Artificial Intelligence and the Future of Human Mind](http://amzn.to/2iSGqUU)

[![15](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/15.png)](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/15.png)

This book is written by Marvin Minsky. In this book, Marvin offers a
fascinating model of how our mind works. He tries to infer the future of
human mind by examining different forms of mind activity. You’ll find
path breaking research findings where Marvin has challenge the status
quo. This book is great to develop perspective and become aware of
present to future transition of A.I

### [Artificial Intelligence (3rd Edition)](http://amzn.to/2iSOgy0)

[![16](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/16.png)](https://www.analyticsvidhya.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/10/16.png)

This book is written by Patrick Henry Winston. This is an introductory
book on artificial intelligence. Non-programmers can easily understand
the explanations and concepts. More advanced AI topics are covered but
haven’t been explained in depth. However some chapters, do cover a great
deal of information. It teaches to build intelligent systems using
various real life examples. All in all, this book imparts a new shape to
complicated intelligence with simple explanation.

**Disclosure:** *The amazon links in this article are affiliate links.
If you buy a book through this link, we would get paid through Amazon.
This is one of the ways for us to cover our costs while we continue to
create these awesome articles. Further, the list reflects our
recommendation based on content of book and is no way influenced by the
commission.*

End Notes
---------

While compiling this list of books, I found the link of some of their
legal pdf’s uploaded by their authors. I’ve shared the links if you
would want that (added above). In these books, the authors have not only
explained the ML concepts precisely, but also mentioned their
perspective and experiences using those concepts, which you would have
missed otherwise!

Did I leave out a useful book on machine learning and artificial
intelligence? Share you views in the comments section below.

### If you like what you just read & want to continue your analytics learning, [subscribe to our emails](http://feedburner.google.com/fb/a/mailverify?uri=analyticsvidhya), [follow us on twitter](http://twitter.com/analyticsvidhya) or like our [facebook page](http://facebook.com/analyticsvidhya).



