Joseph Lau surges ahead of the Kwok brothers in Forbes 2017 list of ‘Hong Kong’s 50 richest people’
===================================================================================================

PUBLISHED : Wednesday, 18 January, 2017, 10:30pm

UPDATED : Wednesday, 18 January, 2017, 11:30pm

Tycoon Joseph Lau Luen-hung, in spite of concerns over his health, has
unseated Thomas and Raymond Kwok to rank fourth among Hong Kong’s top 50
richest people, according to Forbes’ annual list of individuals and
families that control the most wealth in the city.

Li Ka-shing, 88, ranked as [Hong Kong’s richest
man](http://www.forbes.com/hong-kong-billionaires/list/), continuing his
dominance of the rich list for the 19th straight year. Li’s net worth
shrank US$1 billion to US$30.3 billion from a year earlier as the
port-to-property mogul nicknamed “Superman Li” looked abroad for
non-real estate assets. In 2016, he lost his crown as Asia’s richest man
to Wang Jianlin, 62, who founded the mainland conglomerate Dalian Wanda
Group .

Real estate magnate [Lee
Shau-kee](http://www.forbes.com/profile/lee-shau-kee/?list=hong-kong-billionaires)
retained the second seat, with a net worth of US$23.6 billion. He was
followed by the Cheng family, who control jeweller Chow Tai Fook and New
World Development. The family patriarch [Cheng
Yu-tung](http://www.forbes.com/profile/cheng-family/?list=hong-kong-billionaires)
passed away in September last year, handing over the reins to his eldest
son Henry.

[![](http://www.scmp.com/sites/default/files/styles/486w/public/images/methode/2017/01/18/5e6130d2-dd90-11e6-8fcb-68eb4ed74971_486x.jpg?itok=mzK_3UmT)](http://www.scmp.com/sites/default/files/images/methode/2017/01/18/5e6130d2-dd90-11e6-8fcb-68eb4ed74971_image_hires.jpg)

But a notable riser among the top 10 was Lau, the ailing 65-year-old
property tycoon recently known for his full page advertisement on the
split with ex-girlfriend Yvonne Lui Lai-kwan in [a love
saga,](http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/education-community/article/2048221/fugitive-tycoon-joseph-lau-marry-girlfriend-amid)

Although suffering from renal failure, heart disease and diabetes, and
occasionally bedridden over the last year,
[Lau](http://www.forbes.com/profile/joseph-lau/?list=hong-kong-billionaires)
managed to grow his net worth by US$2.4 billion to US$15.5 billion --
enough for him to overtake Thomas and Raymond Kwok of Sun Hung Kai
Properties.

Lau is the controlling shareholder of Hong Kong-listed developer Chinese
Estate Holdings. He earned his initial fortune by selling ceiling fans
in Hong Kong, and then built on it by short-selling stocks in the 1980s.

In 2014, the billionaire was handed a jail term of five years and three
months by a Macau court for his part in a bribes-for-land racket. Lau
remains a free man in Hong Kong due to the lack of a formal extradition
agreement between the former colonies.

The top positions on this year’s list were dominated by property
tycoons, but casino moguls stagged the biggest comeback, helped by a
turnaround in Macao gambling revenue.

[Pansy Ho](http://www.forbes.com/profile/pansy-ho/), daughter of casino
mogul Stanley Ho, saw her net worth jump 20 per cent to US$4.3 billion,
amid the upcoming opening of the MGM Cotai later this year and her Shun
Tak Holdings’ hotels, ferries and properties, which are expected to
benefit from Macau’s rebound, according to Forbes. She is now the third
richest woman in Hong Kong.

Another member of the Ho family also saw a big change in net worth. The
fortune of Stanley Ho’s fourth wife [Angela
Leong](http://www.forbes.com/profile/angela-leong/), who is a managing
director of SJM Holdings, more than doubled from US$1.5 billion last
year to US$4.1 billion.

“This was partly because shares in the casino group founded by her
husband Stanley Ho rose by 16 per cent ahead of its Cotai debut with
Grand Lisboa Palace \[in 2018\],”a statement by Forbes said.

Tracking the year-long rally by Macau gambling shares, Galaxy
Entertainment chairman [Lui
Che-woo](http://www.forbes.com/profile/lui-che-woo/?list=hong-kong-billionaires)’s
wealth surged nearly 50 per cent in 2016. That has helped him climb one
spot to No 6 from No 7 last year.



