Hong Kong retail spending plunges to 17-year-low as visitors decline and yuan weakens
=====================================================================================

Analyst urges government to use data to improve tourism spending
predictions

PUBLISHED : Friday, 03 February, 2017, 9:46pm

UPDATED : Friday, 03 February, 2017, 10:52pm

With retail sales in Hong Kong plummetting to a 17-year-low, experts
have called on the government to take action to better predict tourist
spending habits.

The city’s retail sales totalled HK$436.6 billion at the end of 2016,
down 8 per cent compared to 2015, government figures released Friday
showed. It marked the biggest drop in consumer spending since 1999.

Continuing a sustained decline in consumer spending in the city, retail
receipts totalled HK$42.4 billion in December alone – a 2.9 per cent
drop year-on-year.

But it wasn’t all bad news, as total sales in the fourth quarter were up
2.3 per cent on the third quarter, and December’s year-on-year sales
decline narrowed compared with previous months, reflecting a revival in
tourist arrivals that month, a government spokesman explained.  

[Hong Kong budget to include short-term stimulus measures, finance chief
hints](http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/economy/article/2066239/hong-kong-budget-include-short-term-stimulus-measures)

“Looking ahead, the near-term outlook for retail sales business will
still depend on whether the recent improvement in inbound tourism could
gain more traction and the extent to which local consumer sentiment
would be affected by various external uncertainties,” he said.

![](http://www.scmp.com/sites/default/files/styles/660x385/public/images/methode/2017/02/03/e321e44a-e9fe-11e6-925a-a992a025ddf7_660x385.JPG?itok=8kvU9Tod "Shoppers seen at Tsim Sha Tsui late last year, when retail sales hit a 17-year-low. Photo: Edward Wong")

Shoppers seen at Tsim Sha Tsui late last year, when retail sales hit a
17-year-low. Photo: Edward Wong

Louis Tse Ming-kwong, director of VC Brokerage, said the drop in
mainland visitors was the main reason for the retail slump.

“Before 2015, when the yuan was strong, \[mainlanders\] loved coming to
Hong Kong. Now they prefer to go overseas to places like Southeast
Asia,” he said.

Noting the continued weakening of the yuan against the Hong Kong dollar
in the wake of Beijing’s currency devaluation in 2015, Tse said the
latest retail figures were not surprising.

“The \[retail market\] has been gradually going down because the drop of
the yuan has been more obvious than before, and continues to do so,” Tse
said.

But now is not the time for the city to rest on its laurels, according
to Peter Hopper, Asia Pacific managing director of consulting firm
Strategic Decisions Group.

[Can Hong Kong keep up with the rise of the
robots?](http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/economy/article/2065431/can-hong-kong-keep-rise-robots)

“The drop in retail sales serves as a reminder that we can no longer sit
and wait for tourists to come and spend in Hong Kong,” he said.

Hopper urged the government to capitalise on transport, communications
and telecommunications data to better predict tourist spending habits.

The Hong Kong Retail Management Association said most of its members
were forecasting mid single-digit growth to low double-digit declines
for January and February sales.

Visitor numbers from mainland China dropped 6.7 per cent in 2016,
compared to 2015, dragging overall visitor numbers down by 4.5 per cent.



