Hongyu Wang: Centrist judge our last-ditch hope to prevent full-scale uprising
==============================================================================

By [本土新聞](http://www.localpresshk.com/author/janis/)

On 一月 1, 2017

  
  
  

![](http://www.localpresshk.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/0101_woo-1.jpg?x16008)

There weren’t many hopeful signs in 2016, all over the world. And in our
homeland none seemed ever hopeful and a dignified life seemed had all
but gone ever since the outgoing Leung Chun-ying came into power with
the blessing of 689 election committee members.

But wait, we still have one glimmer of hope, just emerged on the
surface, out of nowhere. A 70-year-old retired judge with a centrist
pledge rarely seen in the heavily polarised politics of today vowed to
bring us back on track. In an era of either anti- or pro- establishment
and either yellow or blue it is our blessing that Woo Kwok-hing, former
vice president of the Court of Appeal, has thrown himself fully into the
2017 chief executive selection with a sober understanding on what would
prevent a total break-down and a full-scale uprising.

In a place where either kowtowing unconditionally to Beijing regardless
of the cost of who we are or unwaveringly and indiscriminately opposing
whatever the government does even with relentless street violence,
centrism is the only plausible way out of Hong Kong’s dilemma and path
to normality. The 2017 chief executive race, even if only involves 1,200
election committee members (1,194 returned), is a timely rain in this
fatalistic era of great struggle.

Putting political reform at the forefront of his political platform, Mr
Woo’s vision of a nomination committee is of the very same size as
today’s election committee, only that members are to be elected
popularly by all registered voters. It does not contravene 31 August
2014 National People’s Congress Standing Committee decision, nor does it
deny universal suffrage and a genuine choice for the head of government.
In the very essence it embodies what is decreed in the Basic Law about a
broadly representative committee and the goal of eventually attaining
universal suffrage. Whether we will need Mr Woo’s 15 years to roll it
out gradually is debatable but this centrist ideal should better be in
place, and fast, before it is too late. Once a democratic mechanism for
the chief executive election is in place, abolishing Functional
Constituencies in the Legislative Council will certainly be a natural
follow-up.

Centrism is also fully evident in Mr Woo’s land and housing policies.
Developing brownfield land and accelerating the redevelopment of urban
slums are not new ideas but have never been on a scale like what Mr Woo
has pledged to do. Public housing has been around since as early as the
1950s but making home ownership scheme, subsidised private ownership
blocks, a policy focus is indeed unprecedented. Reserving land for
building homes solely for first-time buyers and solely for occupation
purpose whilst transforming “small houses” into “small blocks” and
building youth hostels are virtually unheard of.

  
  
  

Although Mr Woo’s social policies are conservative-oriented and is
nowhere near the badly needed democratic socialist overhaul, it does
blend opinions from the left to the right. Mr Woo proposed no new
additions to the current mean and restricted social welfare schemes but
did say that eligibility requirements need be fixed on paper. Whilst Mr
Woo’s retrogressive measures of legislating standard working hours for
certain jobs at 48 or 50 hours a week and reducing proposed overtime pay
from 1.5 to 1.2 times that of standard salary is heartbreaking, he did
suggest to link minimum wage level to inflation and abolish mandatory
provident fund offset for severance fees, applicable only to new hires,
though both timelines are extended long into the future. Similarly, a
universal HK$ 2,500 monthly retirement plan is in no way alleviating but
Mr Woo did offer this amount free of means test, should he have the
blessing of sensible and reasonable election committee members to enter
the Government House.

On economic policies front Mr Woo’s plan is also a mix of backing the
Belt and Road grandeur and supporting SMEs and entrepreneurs through
developing crowdfunding platforms, fintechs, innovative industries and
big data businesses.

Watching his interviews and talks, if ever in today’s political climate
there are enough people still having the patience to do so, you cannot
help but love his charisma and innocence. A soft-spoken Victorian style
gentleman, the Britain-educated Mr Woo, who had just renounced British
citizenship in order to qualify as a chief executive candidate,
demonstrated the true colour of a constructive Hong Kong localist with a
no-nonsense disregard of the popular localism sentiment of independence,
self-determination and constitutional referendum.

A personal touch of his desire to uphold justice, press freedom and all
the fundamental human rights that are all what we are, albeit only
taking a few lines in Mr Woo’s 47-page political platform, can be sensed
inside-out which cannot fault but make any pragmatic person think and
reflect, rather than propelling us to the streets.

Mr Woo and his constructive centrism deserve a try. Maybe we should
really try, try this one last attempt, solemnly, sincerely and truly, to
preserve, protect and defend all that we love so very dearly. Mr Woo is
everything that other contenders, declared and hidden, are not.

I vow to thee Woo Kwok-hing. Thou shalt carry, for thy campaign wilt
bestow us a chance back on track to peace and equality.

By Hongyu Wang

  
  
  



